{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Menlo-Regular;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl720\margr720\vieww11900\viewh10820\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural

\f0\fs22 \cf0 Aerial surveys of marine mammals are generally much cheaper than shipboard surveys. We anticipate that aerial surveys with human observers will increasingly be replaced by unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) surveys with digital video or still cameras as observers. Such surveys present some new statistical challenges. In this paper we address these challenges and develop a method of estimating animal density from such UAV surveys.\
\
Animals are within detectable range of an observer on an aircraft for much less time than they are to an observer on a ship, because aircraft move much faster than ships. More animals tend to be missed from an aircraft because more are underwater and unobservable while within detection range. This is known as the ``$g(0)<1$'' problem in the line transect literature \\textbf\{add citation\}. The bias that results from ignoring this problem is often called ``availability bias'' \\textbf\{add citation\}. This problem is more severe for UAVs with digital cameras than for aircraft with himans because the cameras typically have much smaller fields of view: perhaps 100m either side of the survey transect line, compared with 1000m or more for human observers.\
\
Mark-recapture distance sampling (MRDS) methods \\textbf\{add citation\} are commonly used to deal with the ``$g(0)<1$''  problem. These methods are a variety of capture-recapture method, in which two independently searching observers constitute two ``capture occasions'' and animals detected by both constitute ``recaptures''. MRDS methods with UAVs would require two cameras, either mounted on the same UAV, or on two UAVs, one behind the other.\
\
MRDS methods on aerial surveys suffer from the fact that two observers on the same aircraft search the same patch of sea at the same time so that animals tend to be available or unavailable to both observers at the same time. This induces positive correlation in the detection events between the observers, and negative bias in density estimates \\textbf\{add citation\}. (For those familiar with capture-recapture models, you can think of the availability state of an animal as an individual-level latent variable: when there is unmodelled individual heterogeneity on capture-recapture surveys, density estimates are biased.) Because UAV camera fields of view are much smaller than those human observers, this problem of lack of independence between observers will be more severe for a UAV carrying two cameras.\
\
There are two ways in which this problem has been dealt with. The first is to model the latent process, i.e., the availability process. For example, \\textbf\{(citations)\} modelled latent availability using a hidden Markov model, while \\textbf\{(citations)\} modelled it using a Markov modulated Poisson processes. The second way is to separate the times that the two observers search the same region, either by having one observer search far ahead of the aircraft and the other close to it, or by using two aircraft in tandem, or having a single aircraft circle back over its path a second time \\citep[see][(need to add others too?)]\{Hiby+Lovell:98\}.\
\
However, separating the observers in this way has a cost: it introduces uncertainty into capture histories.\
\
MRDS methods require capture histories, i.e. they require that every detected individual be identified as having been detected by observer 1 only (capture history (1,0)), observer 2 only (capture history (0,1)), or both observers (capture history (1,1)). Because marine mammals are generally not individually identifiable from a fast-moving aerial survey platform, it is often not possible to obtain these capture histories without error. \
\
The greater the time separation between observers, the more severe is the problem of errors in capture histories, but the less severe the problem of dependence in detections.\
\
Separating UAV observers by using UAVs in tandem or circling back on themselves is much less feasible than doing the same with human observers on aircraft. This is because field conditions are typically such that it is not possible for the aircraft doing the second pass to follow exactly the path of the aircraft doign the first pass. When observer field of view is around 2,000m wide (as is not unusual with human observers), having a second pass that deviates by 200m from the path of the first pass still leaves considerable overlap between the regions surveyed by each observer. It would leave no overlap at all for UAVs with fields of view 200m wide. \
\
We seek a method that allows a single UAV to carry two cameras. This limits the extent to which the two observers can be separated in time and requires that we deal with dependence between detections. We develop a method that does not require capture histories to be assigned to any individuals and deals with dependence by modelling the availability process. \
\
Our method is similar to that of \\cite\{Stevenson+al:18\} in that it has the same data requirements and does not require capture histories. It differs in that we do inference by maximum likelihood rather than using an approximation to the Palm likelihood. Unlike the method of \\cite\{Stevenson+al:18\}, our method becomes computationally infeasible when there are very many plausible pairings of detections by different observers. We investigate the utility of our method and compare it to that of \\cite\{Stevenson+al:18\} when this is not the case. It is also similar to that of \\cite\{Hiby+Lovell:98\}.}